--- PAGE 1 ---
ICSE Class X English Literature (Paper 2) 
MOCK SPECIMEN PAPER - 01 (2026) 
Time Allowed: Two Hours​
Maximum Marks: 80 
 
Instructions: 
1.​ Answers to this Paper must be written on the answer sheet provided separately. 
2.​ You will not be allowed to write during the first 15 minutes. This time is to be 
spent in reading the question paper. 
3.​ The paper has four Sections: Section A, Section B, Section C, and Section D. 
4.​ Section A is compulsory - All questions in Section A must be answered. 
5.​ You must attempt one question from each of Sections B, C, and D and one other 
question from any Section of your choice. 
6.​ The intended marks for questions or parts of questions are given in brackets [ ]. 
 
SECTION A (16 Marks) 
(Attempt all questions from this Section) 
Question 1​
Choose the correct answers to the questions from the given options: [16x1=16] 
(i) Where does Act III of Julius Caesar begin?​
(a) In Brutus' orchard​
(b) On the battlefield at Philippi​
(c) In the Capitol / Senate House​
(d) At Caesar's house 
(ii) What does Antony predict will happen as a result of Caesar's death?​
(a) Peace and prosperity in Rome​
(b) Civil war and chaos throughout Italy​

--- PAGE 2 ---
(c) The crowning of Brutus as emperor​
(d) The immediate surrender of the conspirators 
(iii) In the play Julius Caesar, who is referred to as "a slight unmeritable man"?​
(a) Casca​
(b) Lepidus​
(c) Decius Brutus​
(d) Trebonius 
(iv) Why does Cassius believe they should not march to Philippi?​
(a) Their army is stronger if they stay where they are​
(b) They will be welcomed by the people of Philippi​
(c) Antony's forces are weak and will surrender​
(d) They have no weapons to fight 
(v) In Leigh Hunt's poem 'The Glove and the Lions', what does the lady throw into the 
lion's den?​
(a) A flower​
(b) A ring​
(c) A glove​
(d) A handkerchief 
(vi) In Sukumar Ray's poem 'The Power of Music', what happens to the people who hear 
Bhishma Lochan Sharma sing?​
(a) They dance with joy​
(b) They clap and cheer​
(c) They flee in terror​
(d) They retire amazed 
(vii) In H.W. Longfellow's poem 'Haunted Houses', what can the stranger at the fireside 
NOT see?​
(a) The furniture in the room​
(b) The forms that the poet sees​
(c) The flames in the fireplace​
(d) The windows and doors 
(viii) In Maya Angelou's poem 'When Great Trees Fall', what do "small things" do when 
great trees fall?​
(a) They run away quickly​
(b) They gather together​

--- PAGE 3 ---
(c) They recoil into silence​
(d) They sing songs of mourning 
(ix) In Robert Frost's poem 'A Considerable Speck', what does the poet notice on his 
paper?​
(a) A tiny insect​
(b) A speck of dust​
(c) A drop of ink​
(d) A loose thread 
(x) In Stephen Leacock's story 'With the Photographer', why does the narrator visit the 
photographer?​
(a) To buy a camera​
(b) To get his picture taken​
(c) To meet a friend​
(d) To complain about a previous photograph 
(xi) In William Sleator's story 'The Elevator', what is Martin terrified of?​
(a) The dark staircase​
(b) The old building​
(c) The fat lady in the elevator​
(d) His father's anger 
(xii) In Ama Ata Aidoo's story 'The Girl Who Can', what is Nana's objection to Adjoa's 
legs?​
(a) They are too long​
(b) They are too thin and slender​
(c) They are too muscular​
(d) They are bent and crooked 
(xiii) In Ray Bradbury's story 'The Pedestrian', why is Leonard Mead arrested?​
(a) For trespassing on private property​
(b) For walking alone at night without purpose​
(c) For stealing from a shop​
(d) For disturbing the peace 
(xiv) In Alphonse Daudet's story 'The Last Lesson', what shocking news does Franz learn 
at school?​
(a) The school is being closed permanently​
(b) His teacher is leaving​

--- PAGE 4 ---
(c) An order from Berlin forbids teaching French​
(d) There will be no more examinations 
(xv) In the poem 'The Glove and the Lions', why does the king react with anger towards 
the lady?​
(a) She interrupted the lion fight​
(b) She showed cruelty without love​
(c) She refused to marry anyone​
(d) She laughed at the lions 
(xvi) In the poem 'The Power of Music', what happens to Bhishma Lochan Sharma when 
he sings?​
(a) Everyone praises him​
(b) He causes destruction all around​
(c) He wins a music competition​
(d) He becomes famous 
 
SECTION B (DRAMA) 
(Answer one or more questions from this Section) 
Question 2​
Read the extract given below from Julius Caesar (Act III, Scene 1) and answer the 
questions that follow: [16] 
Caesar: I could be well moved, if I were as you;​
If I could pray to move, prayers would move me;​
But I am constant as the northern star,​
Of whose true-fixed and resting quality​
There is no fellow in the firmament. 
(i) Who is Caesar speaking to? What are they asking of Caesar? Why is Caesar refusing 
their request? [3] 
(ii) Explain the meaning of: "I am constant as the northern star". What quality of Caesar's 
character is revealed here? [3] 
(iii) What does Caesar mean when he says, "There is no fellow in the firmament"? How 
does this statement reflect his attitude towards himself? [3] 

--- PAGE 5 ---
(iv) What happens immediately after this speech? Who strikes Caesar first, and what are 
Caesar's final words? [3] 
(v) Do you think Caesar's refusal to listen to the petitioners was an act of strength or 
weakness? Give reasons for your answer. [4] 
Question 3​
Read the extract given below from Julius Caesar (Act IV, Scene 3) and answer the 
questions that follow: [16] 
Brutus: Remember March, the ides of March remember:​
Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?​
What villain touched his body, that did stab,​
And not for justice? 
(i) To whom is Brutus speaking in this extract? What is the context of this conversation? 
[3] 
(ii) Why does Brutus remind the listener about the ides of March? What point is he trying 
to make? [3] 
(iii) What accusation has been made earlier in this scene that leads to this heated 
exchange? How does the other person respond? [3] 
(iv) What news does Messala bring at the end of this scene? How does Brutus react to 
this news? [3] 
(v) Compare and contrast the characters of Brutus and Cassius as revealed in this 
scene. Who do you think is the better leader? Give reasons. [4] 
 
SECTION C (PROSE - SHORT STORIES) 
(Answer one or more questions from this Section) 
Question 4​
Read the extract given below from Stephen Leacock's short story 'With the 
Photographer' and answer the questions that follow: [16] 

--- PAGE 6 ---
"The photographer rolled a machine into the middle of the room and backed it against the 
light. He looked through the finder and then came to me and turned my face a little, pulling 
at my ear. Then he went back and looked through the finder again." 
(i) Where is the narrator at this point? Why has he come to this place? [3] 
(ii) What does the photographer do to the narrator before taking the photograph? Why 
does he do this? [3] 
(iii) How does the narrator feel about the photographer's actions? What does this reveal 
about the narrator's character? [3] 
(iv) Later in the story, when the photographer shows the final photograph, what is the 
narrator's reaction? Why does he react this way? [3] 
(v) What is the central theme of Leacock's story? Do you sympathize with the narrator or 
the photographer? Give reasons for your answer. [4] 
Question 5​
Read the extract given below from Ray Bradbury's short story 'The Pedestrian' and 
answer the questions that follow: [16] 
"The street was silent and long and empty, with only his shadow moving like the shadow of 
a hawk in midcountry. If he closed his eyes and stood very still, frozen, he could imagine 
himself upon the center of a plain, a wintry, windless Arizona desert with no house in a 
thousand miles, and only dry riverbeds, the streets, for company." 
(i) Who is the person described in this extract? What is he doing? [3] 
(ii) Why does he compare himself to "the shadow of a hawk in midcountry"? What does 
this comparison suggest about his experience? [3] 
(iii) What time of year and what time of day is it? How does the setting contribute to the 
mood of the story? [3] 
(iv) What happens to this person later in the story? What reason is given for this action? 
[3] 
(v) What is Bradbury criticizing through this story? How is the story relevant to our 
modern world? [4] 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Question 6​
Read the extract given below from Alphonse Daudet's short story 'The Last Lesson' and 
answer the questions that follow: [16] 
"My last French lesson! I hardly knew how to write, and I should never learn now! How I 
regretted the time wasted in the woods, the lessons I had missed, running about after 
birds' nests, or sliding on the Saar! My books, that a moment before seemed so tiresome, 
so heavy to carry—my grammar, my Bible—seemed now like old friends, from whom I 
would be forced to part." 
(i) Who is the speaker of these lines? Why is this particular lesson his "last French 
lesson"? [3] 
(ii) What does the speaker regret? What had he wasted his time doing instead of 
studying? [3] 
(iii) How does his attitude towards his books change? Why does this change occur? [3] 
(iv) What other changes does he notice in the classroom that day? Who else is present 
in the class? [3] 
(v) What is the significance of the title "The Last Lesson"? What message does the story 
convey about language and identity? [4] 
 
SECTION D (POETRY) 
(Answer one or more questions from this Section) 
Question 7​
Read the following extract from H.W. Longfellow's poem 'Haunted Houses' and answer 
the questions that follow: [16] 
All houses wherein men have lived and died​
Are haunted houses. Through the open doors​
The harmless phantoms on their errands glide,​
With feet that make no sound upon the floors. 
(i) According to the poet, what makes a house a "haunted house"? How does the poet's 
idea of ghosts differ from the traditional frightening view? [3] 

--- PAGE 8 ---
(ii) How do the phantoms move? What does their movement suggest about their 
nature? [3] 
(iii) Explain the meaning of: "The stranger at my fireside cannot see / The forms I see, 
nor hear the sounds I hear." Who is the stranger, and what can the poet see that others 
cannot? [3] 
(iv) What views does the poet express about owning property? What does he mean by 
"the memory of the dead" holds the title to the land? [3] 
(v) Describe the mood of this poem. How does Longfellow use imagery to create this 
mood? Do you find the poem comforting or unsettling? Why? [4] 
Question 8​
Read the following extract from Leigh Hunt's poem 'The Glove and the Lions' and 
answer the questions that follow: [16] 
King Francis was a hearty king, and loved a royal sport,​
And one day, as his lions fought, sat looking on the court;​
The nobles filled the benches, and the ladies in their pride,​
And 'mongst them sat the Count de Lorge, with one for whom he sighed. 
(i) What "royal sport" is the king watching? Describe the scene in the arena. [3] 
(ii) Who is sitting among the nobles? What is his relationship with one of the ladies 
present? [3] 
(iii) What does the lady do that shocks everyone? Why does she do this? [3] 
(iv) How does the Count de Lorge respond to the lady's action? What does he do? [3] 
(v) What is the king's final judgment on the lady's action? What lesson does the poem 
teach about true love and courage? [4] 
Question 9​
Read the following extract from Maya Angelou's poem 'When Great Trees Fall' and 
answer the questions that follow: [16] 
When great trees fall,​
rocks on distant hills shudder,​
lions hunker down​
in tall grasses,​

--- PAGE 9 ---
and even elephants​
lumber after safety. 
(i) What is the "great tree" a metaphor for in this poem? What effect does its fall have on 
the surrounding environment? [3] 
(ii) Why do the lions "hunker down" and the elephants "lumber after safety"? What do 
these reactions symbolize? [3] 
(iii) According to the poem, how do human beings react immediately after the death of a 
great soul? What emotions do they experience? [3] 
(iv) Explain the meaning of: "Our senses, eroded, beyond fear." What does the poet mean 
by this? [3] 
(v) What is the central message of Maya Angelou's poem? How does the poem offer 
hope and healing to those who grieve? [4] 
 

