--- PAGE 1 ---
ICSE Class X English Literature (Paper 2) 
MOCK SPECIMEN PAPER - 02 (2026) 
Time Allowed: Two Hours​
Maximum Marks: 80 
 
Instructions: (Same as Paper 1) 
 
SECTION A (16 Marks) 
(Attempt all questions from this Section) 
Question 1​
Choose the correct answers to the questions from the given options: [16x1=16] 
(i) In Julius Caesar, who stabs Caesar first?​
(a) Brutus​
(b) Cassius​
(c) Casca​
(d) Trebonius 
(ii) What does Antony call Lepidus in Act IV?​
(a) "a noble Roman"​
(b) "a slight unmeritable man"​
(c) "a valiant warrior"​
(d) "a true friend" 
(iii) Why does Brutus decide to march to Philippi despite Cassius's advice?​
(a) He believes their army is growing weaker​
(b) He wants to surprise the enemy​
(c) He thinks the people of Philippi will join them​
(d) He is afraid of Cassius's plan 

--- PAGE 2 ---
(iv) In Leigh Hunt's poem 'The Glove and the Lions', how does the Count de Lorge react 
after retrieving the glove?​
(a) He kisses the lady's hand​
(b) He throws the glove in the lady's face​
(c) He keeps the glove as a trophy​
(d) He gives it to the king 
(v) In Sukumar Ray's poem 'The Power of Music', what happens to Bhishma Lochan 
Sharma's wife?​
(a) She runs away​
(b) She faints​
(c) She claps her hands​
(d) She sings along 
(vi) In H.W. Longfellow's poem 'Haunted Houses', how do the phantoms move?​
(a) They walk heavily​
(b) They glide without sound​
(c) They fly through windows​
(d) They dance in circles 
(vii) In Maya Angelou's poem 'When Great Trees Fall', what happens to our senses after 
a great loss?​
(a) They become sharper​
(b) They are eroded beyond fear​
(c) They disappear completely​
(d) They grow stronger 
(viii) In Robert Frost's poem 'A Considerable Speck', why does the poet decide not to kill 
the mite?​
(a) He is afraid of it​
(b) He recognizes it has a mind of its own​
(c) He wants to study it​
(d) He feels pity for its smallness 
(ix) In Stephen Leacock's story 'With the Photographer', what does the photographer 
want to remove entirely from the photograph?​
(a) The narrator's nose​
(b) The narrator's ears​
(c) The narrator's eyebrows​
(d) The narrator's mouth 

--- PAGE 3 ---
(x) In William Sleator's story 'The Elevator', where does Martin live with his father?​
(a) On the ground floor​
(b) On the 17th floor​
(c) On the 10th floor​
(d) On the 5th floor 
(xi) In Ama Ata Aidoo's story 'The Girl Who Can', what does Adjoa believe she can do 
well?​
(a) Sing and dance​
(b) Have children​
(c) Run and win races​
(d) Cook and clean 
(xii) In Ray Bradbury's story 'The Pedestrian', what is the name of the main character?​
(a) Mr. Smith​
(b) Leonard Mead​
(c) Robert Jones​
(d) William Brown 
(xiii) In Alphonse Daudet's story 'The Last Lesson', what subject does M. Hamel teach?​
(a) History​
(b) German​
(c) French​
(d) Mathematics 
(xiv) In Julius Caesar, what does Brutus see just before the battle at Philippi?​
(a) A vision of Caesar's ghost​
(b) A flock of birds​
(c) A burning city​
(d) A marching army 
(xv) In the poem 'The Glove and the Lions', what is the king's final judgment?​
(a) "Love is blind and lovers cannot see"​
(b) "Cruelty without love deserves no love"​
(c) "True love always conquers all"​
(d) "Courage is the greatest virtue" 
(xvi) In the poem 'The Power of Music', what happens to the trees when Bhishma sings?​
(a) They bloom with flowers​
(b) They shake and crash​

--- PAGE 4 ---
(c) They grow taller​
(d) They remain still 
 
SECTION B (DRAMA) 
(Answer one or more questions from this Section) 
Question 2​
Read the extract given below from Julius Caesar (Act III, Scene 2) and answer the 
questions that follow: [16] 
Antony: Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears;​
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.​
The evil that men do lives after them;​
The good is oft interred with their bones;​
So let it be with Caesar. 
(i) Where is Antony speaking these lines? What is the occasion? [3] 
(ii) Why does Antony begin by saying "I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him"? What is 
his real intention? [3] 
(iii) What does Antony mean by "The evil that men do lives after them; / The good is oft 
interred with their bones"? How does this apply to Caesar? [3] 
(iv) Later in this speech, Antony repeats the phrase "Brutus is an honourable man". What 
effect does this repetition have on the crowd? [3] 
(v) Do you think Antony's funeral speech was justified, or did he manipulate the crowd 
unfairly? Give reasons for your answer. [4] 
Question 3​
Read the extract given below from Julius Caesar (Act V, Scene 5) and answer the 
questions that follow: [16] 
Antony: This was the noblest Roman of them all:​
All the conspirators, save only he,​
Did that they did in envy of great Caesar;​

--- PAGE 5 ---
He only, in a general honest thought​
And common good to all, made one of them. 
(i) Who is Antony speaking about? Why does he call this person "the noblest Roman of 
them all"? [3] 
(ii) How does Antony distinguish this person from the other conspirators? What 
motivated the others versus what motivated this person? [3] 
(iii) What has just happened to this person before Antony speaks these words? How did 
he die? [3] 
(iv) What does Antony say about this person's life and death? How does he propose to 
honor him? [3] 
(v) Do you agree with Antony's assessment of this character? Was he truly noble, or 
were his actions flawed? Give reasons. [4] 
 
SECTION C (PROSE - SHORT STORIES) 
(Answer one or more questions from this Section) 
Question 4​
Read the extract given below from William Sleator's short story 'The Elevator' and 
answer the questions that follow: [16] 
"He pushed the button for three. The doors slid shut, and the elevator started up. And then, 
just before it got to three, it stopped. It stopped between floors. The lights went out. And in 
the darkness, he heard her breathing." 
(i) Who is "he" in this extract? Why is he afraid of the elevator? [3] 
(ii) Who is the woman described in the story? How is she described physically? [3] 
(iii) What happens to the elevator in this scene? Why is this situation particularly 
terrifying for Martin? [3] 
(iv) How does Martin's father react when Martin tries to tell him about his fears? What 
does this reveal about their relationship? [3] 

--- PAGE 6 ---
(v) What do you think happens at the end of the story? Is the ending effective? Why or 
why not? [4] 
Question 5​
Read the extract given below from Ama Ata Aidoo's short story 'The Girl Who Can' and 
answer the questions that follow: [16] 
"And I have always liked to travel. I think it is because from as far back as I can remember, 
I have always wanted to see some other places. And my grandmother Nana used to say 
that it is a wanderlust which she believes is a disease." 
(i) Who is the speaker of these lines? What is her relationship with Nana? [3] 
(ii) What does Nana think about the speaker's legs? Why does she hold this view? [3] 
(iii) What does the speaker mean by "wanderlust"? Why does Nana call it a disease? [3] 
(iv) What event at school changes Nana's opinion about the speaker? How does Nana 
react? [3] 
(v) What is the significance of the title "The Girl Who Can"? What message does the 
story convey about gender expectations and individual potential? [4] 
Question 6​
Read the extract given below from Alphonse Daudet's short story 'The Last Lesson' and 
answer the questions that follow: [16] 
"Then he opened a grammar book and read us our lesson. I was amazed to see how well I 
understood it. Everything seemed easy, everything seemed simple. I believe, too, that I had 
never listened so carefully, and that he had never explained everything with so much 
patience." 
(i) Who is the speaker? What lesson is being read, and why is it special? [3] 
(ii) Why does the speaker find the lesson easy to understand on this particular day? 
What has changed? [3] 
(iii) What does the speaker notice about M. Hamel's behavior? How is it different from 
usual? [3] 
(iv) What does M. Hamel write on the blackboard at the end of the class? What is the 
significance of this? [3] 

--- PAGE 7 ---
(v) Why do you think the story is told from a child's perspective? How does this 
perspective make the story more powerful? [4] 
 
SECTION D (POETRY) 
(Answer one or more questions from this Section) 
Question 7​
Read the following extract from Robert Frost's poem 'A Considerable Speck' and answer 
the questions that follow: [16] 
A speck that would have been beneath my sight​
On any but a paper sheet so white​
As this ahead of me upon the desk​
Suddenly moved and multiplied. I mused​
That it was something like a tiny mite 
(i) What does the poet notice on his paper? Why does he notice it particularly on this 
paper? [3] 
(ii) What does the speck do that captures the poet's attention? What does the poet think 
it might be? [3] 
(iii) Why does the poet decide to spare the mite's life? What does he recognize in its 
behavior? [3] 
(iv) What does the poet mean when he says the mite had "a mind of its own"? Why is 
this significant? [3] 
(v) What is the central theme of Frost's poem? What does the poem suggest about the 
value of even the smallest creatures? [4] 
Question 8​
Read the following extract from Sukumar Ray's poem 'The Power of Music' and answer 
the questions that follow: [16] 
Bhishma Lochan Sharma began to sing​
The raga深 which he chose was Bhairav,​
But everyone began to take flight,​

--- PAGE 8 ---
His wife fainted at the very first note,​
The sky wept tears, the trees began to shake,​
And from their branches crashed down to the earth 
(i) Who is Bhishma Lochan Sharma? What is he doing? [3] 
(ii) What happens to his wife when he begins to sing? What does this suggest about his 
singing? [3] 
(iii) How do the elements of nature react to his singing? What is the effect of 
personification here? [3] 
(iv) What happens to the people who hear him sing? How do they respond? [3] 
(v) What is the tone of this poem? Is it meant to be taken seriously, or is it humorous? 
Give reasons for your answer. [4] 
Question 9​
Read the following extract from Maya Angelou's poem 'When Great Trees Fall' and 
answer the questions that follow: `[16]* 
And when great souls die,​
after a period peace blooms,​
slowly and always​
irregularly. Spaces fill​
with a kind of​
soothing electric vibration.​
Our senses, restored, never​
to be the same, whisper to us. 
(i) What does the poet mean by "great souls"? How does their death differ from the 
death of ordinary people? [3] 
(ii) According to the poet, what happens "after a period" following the death of a great 
soul? What does "peace blooms" suggest? [3] 
(iii) Explain the meaning of: "Spaces fill / with a kind of / soothing electric vibration." 
What does this describe? [3] 
(iv) How are our senses affected after we have grieved? What do they whisper to us? 
[3] 

--- PAGE 9 ---
(v) What message of hope does Maya Angelou offer in this poem? How does the poem 
help those who are grieving? [4] 
 

